---
layout: post
title:  "The Problem with Reservation in India"
date:   2024-04-25 10:46
categories: jekyll update
---

The year was 1951. India was a newly independent country, with its constitution just a year old. Only around 18.33% of Indians were literate. Around 80% of Indians were poor. There has been an unfortunate history of caste-based discrimination in India. Post-independence, we needed to make significant developments if we wanted to make progress. So India legalized caste-based reservation, the purpose of which was to elevate certain segments of society and put them at the same level as others. Seats were reserved for certain communities at schools, jobs, and the legislature; this was **supposed to end in 10 years**. 10 years passed; in fact, they have passed seven times now. It's been **76 years since independence**, and reservations remain a painful reality for our nation.

The popular term used for reservations is **"quota." In government schools, government colleges, and government jobs, even for promotion in the jobs. Now, who is this reservation for? SCs, STs, i.e., scheduled castes, and scheduled tribes. In 1990, OBCs, or Other Backward Classes, were added. As recently as 2013, Economically Weaker Sections, or EWS, were added. Today, in the majority of government schools, at least 50% of the seats are reserved. It is far more than 50% in many states. The growing percentage of reservations is destroying dreams. It is becoming a nightmare for those in the unreserved category, commonly known as the general category. In this blog, I will be discussing some major fundamental issues with reservation in India.

Number one: if reservation is about leveling the playing field, then why do we need it after a certain point? I'll give you an example. Say a student from a backward class wants to study medicine so she can take advantage of the country's most prestigious medical institution, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, or AIIMS. Now, it has a 15% reservation for scheduled castes, 7.5% for scheduled tribes, 27% for OBCs, 10% for EWS, and 5% for persons with disabilities (PWD). That's 64.5% of the seats reserved.

With this, India’s premier medical college is supposedly creating a level playing field for all medical aspirants. Okay, let’s go ahead of that. Five years later, a batch of doctors from diverse social and economic backgrounds graduated. They have the same emblem on the certificate, the same salary if they are to apply for residency, and the same social status as they're all doctors, and yet when the same batch of equal students applies for a master's in doctoral medicine, or the PG, as they say it, the level playing field is gone. Certain students get an undue advantage because, guess what, there is a reservation in the master's course too! The same AIIMS has lower cutoff scores for SC, ST, OBC, EWS, and so on and so forth; the cycle continues.

Then there is a job reservation, and a reservation even for promotion! Employees who are hired based on quotas have reservations in promotion. If you believe that, would you classify this as an undue advantage? I would certainly! And this is the fundamental issue. The system is designed for equality, but it's promoting inequality; it's encouraging mediocrity.

Problem number two is that India has reservations for certain castes and tribes. They're clubbed under the categories of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. The problem is that caste is a permanent attribute, so, is the tribe and neither changes with one's financial or social status. So on what basis are we reserving seats? For certain castes and tribes, yes, they may have been backward during independence, but it's been 70 years and more. The world has changed. India has changed. What about the law? Indian laws have changed too. We have decriminalized same-sex relationships in this country, we have delivered verdicts in favor of privacy, but we don't want to touch reservations. Perhaps the reservation is due to politics, a cameo in every major election in India. One side promises increased quotas, another advocates for equality with reservations. This used in bank politics. And this is not new if you're in India. 

Reservations stereotype certain sections. An SC ST student, no matter how meritorious, is always viewed through the lens of quota; their achievements are always attributed to quota. Reservation is divisive; a person who misses out on a college seat because of a reservation is destined to harbor grudges. against the reserved category, this helps politicians divide and rule, but it does not help the voters, the students, the job seekers. Reservations are harming India, not helping it. Let me once again come back to the example of medicine. Reservations in health care were holding it hostage in the middle of a pandemic. India's healthcare system was functioning at 66 capacity as an entire batch of postgraduate students had not entered medical colleges. Counseling was on hold. Do you know why? Because there was an ongoing case in which India's top court faced off against Kota for medical seats. 

Who is this crisis helping? Who is quota helping today? We don't even have legit data to back the need for reserving seats for specific people in the in the community. It's not as if other countries don't have reservations; many of them do. Canada has certain policies in place for Aboriginals and minorities. Japan, has laws that create equal opportunities for indigenous and tribal people. Norway requires companies to have 40% women. Some of these laws are really progressive, but India's reservation system is out of date. It's time to revisit it. To reconsider who the true beneficiaries of this system are, it's time to ensure the fundamental right to education without blocking school seats. It's time to ensure the right to equality without giving undue advantage to a select few. 

Reservations were supposed to make up for the injustices of the caste system. Today, it has created a social division. of its own reservation has given birth to a new kind of structural crisis. Certain seats have become untouchable. The constant increase in quotas is nothing short of oppression. It is punishment for those born into non-reserved categories. 

The fact that people are ready to call themselves backward just to get ahead by getting reservations, shows how screwed up our country's system really is. A system that was supposedly designed for equality, but is promoting inequality, divisiveness and mediocrity. A system that talks about abolishing the caste based discrimination, but makes people write their caste on literally every piece of paper containing their information, starting from their birth, so no one forgets it. A system which was created to make up for the "injustices of the past", but is making people harbour grudges against other each other by violating every sense of justice, equality and merit that it was supposed to accomodate.

**But then how else would you win the votebanks, right?**